You guys will come back to the course.
So in this lecture we're going to talk about keeping your clients happy but also keeping yourself happy
at the same time.
And we do that by keeping the right amount of distance between you and your client.
Now this is just advice coming from me because I've been doing this for a longer period of time.
Is something that you hear from people who have been in the development business for multiple years.
It's something that at the very beginning it's hard to conceptualize.
But over time I wish I had known this a lot sooner.
Now I know that a lot of you out there are probably thinking that your customer service your responsiveness
your personal touch that's going to be a big selling point and a big point of retention for your clients.
Now I don't want to discourage you from using that as a technique to keep your clients happy.
It is absolutely a good thing.
It's always good to be responsive.
They're helpful and it's always good to lean on your personal AFACT to make your project successful.
So that's all good and great but you need to be realistic about what that's going to entail.
What I see constantly happening is we have people who start their business and with their clients they
promise the moon in terms of their involvement.
They say that they're going to be there every week for stand up calls.
They say that they're going to you know send them weekly updates.
They're going to be there for every single conference call etc. etc..
By the way stand up call what that basically means is that it's a very quick update called called Stand
up because they're very short and you typically would do them like you're standing up because they're
so short.
Now the problem with that is that you're not planning for what's going to happen in the future right
now.
Maybe you have three clients and it's realistic that you're going to deliver that promise to them with
three clients you could be there for every single call you could make Friday stand up calls a regular
thing.
But what happens if your mark your fundamentals are good.
What are your marketing efforts efforts take off.
What happens if you grow too fast.
We see this time and time again.
People promise the moon.
They take on extra clients because they're doing well and then all of a sudden they either have to overburden
themselves or they have to essentially break the promise that they gave to the client and they have
to be there much less.
So the question is can you promise this to every single client and not based off of your client load
right now based off of what your client load could be during the duration of the project.
Now just a word of advice.
It is always better to under-promise your involvement and then surprise them if you under-promise and
it ends up being that you don't take on as many clients as you thought you were going to you have extra
time and then you'll really surprise them.
But if it does happen that you get hit with an avalanche of work and that's typically how work cycles
work in development businesses then you can actually keep your promise you'll do exactly what you said
you do.
So practice what we call keeping the right distance.
Now it's kind of a Goldilocks situation where you don't want a ton of distance and you don't want an
enormous amount of intimacy.
You need to gauge with each client what they expect and what they're comfortable with.
Some clients will expect you to be there every single day.
They'll expect that when they text message you will respond within a certain time.
And some clients are the exact opposite.
We've had clients that we honestly thought they had forgot that we were building a project for them.
Those ones are pretty much office space.
They say here it is come back to me.
It's perfect.
Now obviously there's pros and cons to both of those.
You just need to be aware where your client falls on that spectrum of how much they need.
And it's very easy to tease this out when you're talking to them.
It's very easy to quickly understand whether or not they get agitated when you don't respond within
a certain time.
It's easy to understand if they have a certain framework of check ins that they want to enforce.
So now there's two ways that you can make sure that you're maintaining the right amount of distance.
One is again be aware of where on that spectrum that your client falls.
Are they really needy or are they not so needy at all.
Try to figure that out before the project starts.
And that will make it a lot easier for you.
The second thing is set the tone yourself what are the things that a lot of people who are new to this
business need a project management always kind of failed to do as they feel or recognize a project manager.
You can say when the updates are going to be you can set the tone for how much information they're going
to get and how often you update them.
Now 95 percent of the cases a client is going to default to your judgment because you are there on the
ground you know how often you're going to have new information to present to them and you're going to
know how often you need feedback in order for this project to be successful.
Clients do use really understand that being excessive with communication could be a negative thing.
They know roughly that there could be a detriment to their project but in general they're not tiredly
worried about that they're more concerned with feeling as if they're in the loop.
So try to make them feel like they're in the loop.
That's a very important concept here now feeling in the loop again relates our first point first point
being where on the spectrum do they fall if they're a needy client.
Being in the loop means that they're really in the loop and if they're a distant kind of space cadet
client that probably means that every month they hear something vaguely from you.
So try to figure out exactly what in the loop means and then make a judgment call about that to then
enforce your own schedule of check ins and distance.
Again like saying before there are always going to default to you because you're intimate with the project.
So if you say to them you know I'm going to update you on this date.
This is what I'm going to deploy new code and this is when we're actually going to talk on the phone.
They'll follow that schedule.
Now if you have a client who just doesn't need a lot of information then you might want to be more relaxed
with that schedule if you need someone who's a little bit more needy.
Then you can make it a little bit more intensive but because you're leading the decision here you can
push it towards whatever is a reasonable amount for your workload and your project load.
So it's very important when you have a new client that you tell them up front.
This is typically how we work and you can even customize it depending on the project itself as well
and say for your project we're going to check in this often and this is what I'm going to give you this
information.
Tell them that upfront before you even signed the deal so that they know exactly what to expect if they
protest then honestly be considerate.
Think about it.
But if they're asking for something that's entirely too excessive.
Just try to explain to them the two best ways of explaining to them that this is too excessive is one.
You explain to them how much time it takes to give these updates and how it could be a detriment to
the project.
No client ever wants to hear that and to be honest with them tell them that if I update you every single
day I'm going have nothing to say.
We used to do the Friday Night Stand up call so what that basically meant was like every Friday night
we do a standup call our client to say where we're at.
Ended up happening was you know this was the phone call you know hello client.
We have nothing to update you on because there's just nothing to say.
Hey the developer who was working on that feature last week well he's still working on that feature.
What do you want me to say unless that person you're talking to is really technical.
Nothing I'm going to tell them is going to make any sense to them.
I said oh he's you know on this line of code or he's running into this problem.
It means nothing to them.
So try to be smart about how you can gauge how much information they need.
Use that to Judge roughly how much distance they need.
Focus on enforcing the framework yourself.
Be considerate.
If they have their own opinions but also be firm and explain to them why you came up with this communication
schedule.
Seriously if you don't manage your communication schedule upfront you're going to go crazy and you're
going to spread yourself way too thin across projects.
Trust me clients will believe you when you say this is the schedule we need and we don't need any more
intercommunication.
OK guys see you next lecture.